Due to the low RNA content in each single cell, PCR-based amplification is often required to generate enough starting material for sequencing. However, this leads to the problem of PCR amplifcation bias where different cDNA fragments get amplified at different rates. To alleviate this problem, the cDNA molecules are tagged with a random sequence, known as an unique molecular identifier (UMI), during RT and prior to PCR (Fig. 1.8). After PCR amplification, cDNA molecules with the same UMI are determined to have originated from one single RNA molecule. Thus, regardless of the extent of amplification, all the cDNA molecules with the same UMI is treated as a single count.

Conventionally, scRNA-seq is performed with intact cells which requires fresh tissue samples or cell cultures. This presents a major roadblock to frozen / fixed samples or tissues that cannot be readily dissociated. To address this, single-nucleus RNA-seq can be performed where only the nuclei is extracted and captured (Habib et al. 2017). Single-nucleus RNA-seq allow for single-cell measurements on frozen samples.

In a recent benchmarking study, Ding et al. (2020) found that single-nucleus RNA-seq generally performed well for sensitivity and classification of cell types. The transcriptome captured via single-cell and single-nucleus approaches are often comparable with some noticeable difference due to the omission of cytoplasmic RNA. In particular, ribosomal and mitochondrial (MT) RNA are no longer present in single-nucleus RNA-seq. This might be beneficial as these ribosomal and MT RNA often take up the majority of reads in scRNA-seq. Furthermore, single-nucleus libraries often contain more intronic reads from unspliced pre-mRNA. 
